CHAPTER VI.
The ladies of Longbourn soon waited on those of Netherfield.
The visit was returned in due form.
Miss Bennet's pleasing manners grew on the goodwill of Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley, and
So the mother was found to be intolerable, and the young sisters not worth speaking to.
A wish of being better acquainted with them was expressed towards the two eldest.
By Jane this attention was received with the greatest pleasure, but Elizabeth still saw
superciliousness in their treatment of everybody, hardly accepting even her sister, and could
not like them, though their kindness to Jane, such as it was, had a value as arising, in
all probability, from the influence of their brother's admiration.
It was generally evident whenever they met that he did admire her, and to her it was
equally evident that Jane was yielding to the preference which she had begun to entertain
for him from the first, and was in a way to be very much in love.
But she considered with pleasure that it was not likely to be discovered by the world in
general, since Jane united, with great strength of feeling, a composure of temper and a uniform
cheerfulness of manner which would guard her from the suspicions of the impertinent.
She mentioned this to her friend Miss Lucas.
"'It may perhaps be pleasant,' replied Charlotte, "'to be able to impose on the public in such
a case, but it is sometimes a disadvantage to be so very guarded.
If a woman conceals her affection with the same skill from the object of it, she may
lose the opportunity of fixing him, and it will then be but poor consolation to believe
the world equally in the dark.'
There is so much of gratitude or vanity in almost every attachment that it is not safe
to leave any to itself.
We can all begin freely, a slight preference is natural enough, but there are few of us
who have heart enough to be really in love without encouragement.
In nine cases out of ten, a woman had better show more affection than she feels.
Bingley likes your sister undoubtedly, but he may never do more than like her if she
does not help him on.
But she does help him on, as much as her nature will allow.
If I can perceive her regard for him, he must be a simpleton indeed not to discover it too.'
Remember, Eliza, that he does not know Jane's disposition as you do.
But if a woman is partial to a man and does not endeavor to conceal it, he must find it
out.
Perhaps he must if he sees enough of her.
But though Bingley and Jane meet tolerably often, it is never for many hours together,
And as they always see each other in large mixed parties, it is impossible that every
moment should be employed in conversing together.
Jane should therefore make the most of every half hour in which she can command his attention.
When she is secure of him, there will be more leisure for falling in love as much as she
chooses.
"'Your plan is a good one,' replied Elizabeth, where nothing is in question but the desire
of being well married, and if I were determined to get a rich husband or any husband, I dare
say I should adopt it.
But these are not Jane's feelings.
She's not acting by design.
As yet, she cannot even be certain of the degree of her own regard, nor of its reasonableness.
She has known him only a fortnight.
She danced four dances with him at Meryton, she saw him one morning at his own house,
and has since dined with him in company four times.
This is not quite enough to make her understand his character.'
"'Not as you represent it.'
Had she merely dined with him, she might only have discovered whether he had a good appetite.
But you must remember that four evenings have also been spent together, and four evenings
may do a great deal.'
"'Yes, these four evenings have enabled them to ascertain that they both like Vant-Une better
than commerce, but with respect to any other leading characteristic, I do not imagine that
much has been unfolded.'
"'Well,' said Charlotte, "'I wish Jane success with all my heart, and if she were
married to him tomorrow, I should think she had as good a chance of happiness as if she
were to be studying his character for a twelve-month.
Happiness in marriage is entirely a matter of chance.
If the dispositions of the parties are ever so well known to each other, or ever so similar
beforehand, it does not advance their felicity in the least.
They always continue to grow sufficiently unlike afterwards to have their share of vexation,
and it's better to know as little as possible of the defects of the person with whom you
have to pass your life.'
"'Make me laugh, Charlotte, but it's not sound.
You know it's not sound, and you would never act this way yourself.'
Occupied in observing Mr. Bingley's attentions to her sister, Elizabeth was far from suspecting
that she was herself becoming an object of some interest in the eyes of his friend.
Mr. Darcy had at first scarcely allowed her to be pretty.
He had looked at her without admiration at the ball, and when next they met, he looked
at her only to criticize.
But no sooner had he made it clear to himself and to his friends that she hardly had a good
feature in her face than he began to find it was rendered uncommonly intelligent by
the beautiful expression of her dark eyes.
To this discovery succeeded some others equally mortifying, though he had detected with a
critical eye more than one failure of perfect symmetry in her form.
He was forced to acknowledge her figure to be light and pleasing, and in spite of his
asserting that her manners were not those of the fashionable world, he was caught by
their easy playfulness.
Of this she was perfectly unaware.
To her, he was only the man who made himself agreeable nowhere, and who had not thought
her handsome enough to dance with.
He began to wish to know more of her, and as a step towards conversing with her himself,
attended to her conversation with others.
His doing so drew her notice.
It was at Sir William Lucas's where a large party were assembled.
"'What does Mr. Darcy mean,' she said to Charlotte, by listening to my conversation with Colonel
Forster.
"'That's a question which Mr. Darcy only can answer.
But if he does it any more, I shall certainly let him know that I see what he's about.
He has a very satirical eye, and if I do not begin by being impertinent myself, I shall
soon grow afraid of him.'"
On his approaching them soon afterwards, though without seeming to have any intention of speaking,
Miss Lucas defied her friend to mention such a subject to him, which immediately provoking
Elizabeth to do it.
She turned to him and said,
"'Did you not think, Mr. Darcy, that I expressed myself uncommonly well just now, when I was
teasing Colonel Forster to give us a ball at Mariton?'
"'With great energy, but it's always a subject which makes a lady energetic.
You are severe on us.'"
"'It will be her turn soon to be teased,' said Miss Lucas.
"'I am going to open the instrument, Eliza, and you know what follows.'
"'You are a strange creature by way of a friend, always wanting me to play and sing before
anybody and everybody.
If my vanity had taken a musical turn, you would be invaluable, but as it is, I'd really
rather not sit down before those who must be in the habit of hearing the very best performers.'"
On Miss Lucas's persevering, however, she added,
"'Very well.
If it must be so, it must,' and gravely glancing at Mr. Darcy,
"'There's a fine old saying, which everybody here is of course familiar with.
Keep your breath to cool your porridge, and I shall keep mine to swell my song.'"
Her performance was pleasing, though by no means capital.
After a song or two, and before she could reply to entreaties of several that she would
sing again, she was eagerly succeeded at the instrument by her sister Mary, who, having
in consequence of being the only plain one in the family, worked hard for knowledge and
accomplishments, and was always impatient for display.
Mary had neither genius nor taste, and though vanity had given her application, it had given
her likewise a pedantic air and conceited manner, which would have injured a higher
degree of excellence than she had reached.
Elizabeth, easy and unaffected, had been listened to with much more pleasure, though not playing
half so well, and Mary, at the end of a long concerto, was glad to purchase praise and
gratitude by Scotch and Irish heirs at the request of her younger sisters, who, with
some of the Lucas's and two or three officers, joined eagerly in dancing at one end of the
room.
Mr. Darcy stood near them in silent indignation at such a mode of passing the evening to the
exclusion of all conversation, and was much too engrossed by his thoughts to perceive
that Sir William Lucas was his neighbor, till Sir William thus began,
"'What a charming amusement for young people this is, Mr. Darcy.
There's nothing like dancing, after all.
I consider it as one of the first refinements of a Polish society.'
"'Certainly, sir, and it has the advantage also of being in vogue amongst the less Polish
societies of the world.
Every savage can dance.'"
Sir William only smiled.
"'Your friend performs delightfully,' he continued after a pause, on seeing Bingley
join the group.
"'And I doubt not that you are an adept in the science yourself, Mr. Darcy.'
"'You saw me dance at Meryton, I believe, sir.'
"'Yes, indeed, and received no inconsiderable pleasure from the site.
Do you often dance at St. James's?'
"'Never, sir.'
"'Do you not think it would be a proper compliment to the place?'
"'It is a compliment which I never pay to any place, if I can avoid it.'
"'You have a house in town, I conclude,' Mr. Darcy bowed.
"'I had once some thought of fixing in town myself, for I am fond of superior society,
but I did not feel quite certain that the heir of London would agree with Lady Lucas.'
He paused in hopes of an answer, but his companion was not disposed to make any, and
Elizabeth, at that instant, moving towards them, he was struck with the action of doing
a very gallant thing, and called out to her,
"'My dear Miss Eliza, why are you not dancing?
Mr. Darcy, you must allow me to present this young lady to you as a very desirable partner.
You cannot refuse to dance, I am sure, when so much beauty is before you.'
And taking her hand, he would have given it to Mr. Darcy, who, though extremely surprised,
was not unwilling to receive it.
When she instantly drew back, and said with some discomposure to Sir William,
"'Indeed, sir, I have not the least intention of dancing.
I entreat you not to suppose that I move this way in order to beg for a partner.'
Mr. Darcy, with grave propriety, requested to be allowed the honor of her hand, but in
vain.
Elizabeth was determined.
Nor did Sir William at all shake her purpose by his attempt at persuasion.
"'You excel so much in the dance, Miss Eliza, that it is cruel to deny me the happiness
of seeing you, and though this gentleman dislikes the amusement in general, he can have no objection,
I am sure, to oblige us for one half-hour.'
"'Mr. Darcy is all politeness,' said Elizabeth, smiling.
"'He is indeed, but considering the inducement, my dear Eliza, can we not wonder at his complacence,
for who would object to such a partner?'
Elizabeth looked archly, and turned away.
Her resistance had not entered her with the gentleman, and he was thinking of her with
some complacency, when thus accosted by Miss Bingley.
"'I can guess the subject of your reverie.'
"'I should imagine not.
You are considering how insupportable it would be to pass many evenings in this manner, in
such society, and indeed I am quite of your opinion.
"'I was never more annoyed, the insipidity, and yet the noise, the nothingness, and yet
the self-importance of all these people.
Oh, what I would give to hear your strictures on them!'
"'Your conjecture is totally wrong, I assure you.
My mind was more agreeably engaged.
I have been meditating on the very great pleasure which a pair of fine eyes in the face of a
pretty woman can bestow.'
Miss Bingley immediately fixed her eyes on his face, and desired he would tell her what
lady had the credit of inspiring such reflections.
Mr. Darcy replied with great intrepidity.
"'Miss Elizabeth Bennet.'
"'Miss Elizabeth Bennet!'
repeated Miss Bingley.
"'I am all astonishment.
How long has she been such a favorite?
And pray when am I to wish you joy?'
"'That is exactly the question which I expected you to ask.
A lady's imagination is very rapid.
It jumps from admiration to love, from love to matrimony in a moment.
I knew you would be wishing me joy.'
"'Nay, if you are serious about it, I shall consider the matter is absolutely settled.
You will be having a charming mother-in-law indeed, and of course she will always be at
Pemberley with you.'
He listened to her with perfect indifference while she chose to entertain herself in this manner,
and as his composure convinced her that all was safe, her wit flowed long.'
End of chapter 6.
Read by Kristin McQuillan, Tokyo, Japan, November 7, 2005.